---
layout: post
title:  "Nix + Vim: Development Perfected"
date:   2023-11-15 00:00:00 -0500
author: poacher
---

# Introduction

I've previously written about Nix (specifically NixOS) however I have never written about Neovim. I've only recently swapped to Neovim and while I would've loved to write an article about it then, I saw no reason to, however now I do. [NixVim](https://github.com/nix-community/nixvim) is a home-manager module that allows you to declaratively configure Neovim using Nix. These 2 things combined with other features of Nix such as development shells allows for an unmatched portable development environment.

# Why not VSCode?

Because Microsoft sucks, simple as that. I was previously on VSCodium (A FOSS fork of VSCode) and I couldn't stand all the Microsoft jank that it had. VSCode was slow, resource heavy, and overall a poor development experience. Despite all these factors, VSCode is the most used code editor due to its price ($0) and it's relative ease of use. Other free editors like Eclipse are somehow even more janky than VSCode, and the paid ones like all of the JetBrains products are fine (although they're still bloated) but they're also obviously paid.

# Enter, Neovim

Neovim is like the antithesis to all of the above, its FOSS, its fast, its fun. Despite the learning curve, Neovim will eventually allow for a terrific development experience, its just as extensible as VSCode but without any of the Microsoft jank and with a far faster development thanks to Vim Motions (although this is available via plugins on VSCode and most IDEs). 

# Neovim & Nix: The Default

By default, Neovim doesn't play very well with home-manager, the settings are few and the plugin management is rather terrible, being limited to the Nix repos and still having to do some stuff manually. Despite this, it's still nice to have Neovim configured declaratively, however it could be much, much better.

# Enter, NixVim (yes I did it again)

As I briefly mentioned in the introduction, NixVim is a home-manager module that drastically improves Neovim's compatibility with Nix. Of course it allows you to change the base settings of Neovim

```
clipboard = {
    register = "unnamedplus";
    providers = {
	    wl-copy.enable = true;
    };
};
```

however it also lets you do a bunch of shit with plugins. NixVim has it's own repo of plugins and it's own plugin management system, installing a plugin is as simple as putting the following in your config

`plugins.copilot-vim.enable = true;`

but thats not all! NixVim also lets you configure these plugins declaratively

```
plugins.copilot-vim = {
    enable = true;
    filetypes = {
	     "markdown" = false;
        "norg" = false;
    };
};
```

on top of this, NixVim has it's own library of themes (although this is rather small)

`colorschemes.oxocarbon.enable = true;`

# Conclusion

Neovim is cool, Nix is cool, NixVim is really really cool.

# Bonus: Development Shells

I briefly mentioned this earlier and they're also really cool, they allow for a fully portable development environment, think Docker but better. I would recommend basing your shells off of [this repo](https://github.com/the-nix-way/dev-templates) as it has a bunch of preconfigured templates for most common languages.
