---
layout: post
title:  "NixOS: A Brief Overview"
date:   2023-10-20 13:30:00 -0500
author: poacher
---

# Introduction

I've been using NixOS for a week now and it is already my distro of choice and I think you should consider it as well. While it is pretty complex and takes a very long time to configure, the payoff is well worth it. That said payoff is a fully portable system, allowing you to easily swap computers or reinstall.

# Immutability

This isn't a unique thing but it's still pretty cool, the core system is read-only which allows for far greater protection from malware (which is already rather scarce) and a system that is much more difficult to break.

# Declarativity

With an immutable system you might be wondering "But how do I install packages and modify system services?" and that is where declarativity comes in. The core system is configured entirely in 2 files, these are `/etc/nixos/configuration.nix` and `/etc/nixos/hardware-configuration.nix`. After you've finished modifying it, you must rebuild the system entirely, this may seem like a hassle however it takes far less time than you'd expect. Previous builds of your system are saved and able to be booted into at any time, allowing you to revert your system if something breaks. Thats not all though, using nix-flakes and home-manager you're able to make your dotfiles declarative as well, however since this is a brief overview I will not be covering that here.

# Conclusion

NixOS is really damn cool, it allows for an extremely portable and a nearly unbreakable system, something that no other distro can provide.

also heres my config https://github.com/poach3r/tokyo-night-nix-f